Now let's see how we can connect Flutter to Firebase, and for that, here's one important note.
Of course, we already used Flutter in conjunction with Firebase before and we didn't have to go through
all the set up steps.
I just showed you this was possible because we only talked to Firebase in those early sections by using
firebases rest APIs.
So their web APIs, which are exposed by FIREBASE to which we could communicate through flodders to
the package.
And this is a fine way of communicating with Firebase and with any backend.
But Firebase is such a powerful service that you can't use all its services efficiently through just
their Web APIs.
Instead, they give you STK, which are packages you can add to your project.
So to your flutter project, I mean, so that you can execute flutter code and behind the scenes, this
communication with the firebase back and will happen so that you don't have to write and handle all
those outgoing HTP requests on your own.
That's the difference.
That's what we're going to do here.
And that's why we needed this different setup now, because we're going to use some packages which are
provided by the FIREBASE team for flutter apps that make our life easier if we want to dive really deep
into the firebase ecosystem and if we want to use a lot of their services for the dummy back in part
we had earlier for working with any reste APIs or any other Web APIs.
You don't need such a setup and you don't need a dedicated suitcase.
We use that here because we're going to go all in on Firebase in this module and we need access to all
their features and we want that access through a convenient flutter package, which exposes us some
methods we can call, which exposes us a night code base we can use where we don't have to wire up everything
on our own and where we don't have to take care about all the nitty gritty details on our own.
That's the difference.
So to install those packages I'm talking about, you can Google for Flutter Firebase and you'll find
an article in the official Firebase Docs.
Now here you also can learn how to set everything up.
We already did that.
And you see some examples.
Now, if you go back, you will also see that on Flutter Dot Def, you'll also find some firebase documentation.
So on the official Flattr page, on the official flutter docs, you find some firebase documentation.
Now, if you go back again and we manipulate our search query a little bit and you search for Flutter
Firebase Firestorm Store will find the first STK which will install to get started with Firebase.
This STK here, cloud firestorm allows us to communicate with one firebase feature, which is called
Fire Store, which is their database.
Now there are other features as well, and if we want to work with those, we have to add different
flutter packages.
But we're going to get started with this one.
Now, here you see some set of steps and these are mainly the steps we already followed.
So there's not much for us to do here.
Instead, we can go right away to installing and just wrap this link here and added an ARTPOP spectate
YAML file here, maybe below the Cupertino Aitken's.
And if you didn't save to file, this package should be automatically installed.
If not, you can manually run flutter packages, get this installs this flutter package into your project
and now you can import it and use it in your code now to get started.
Let's go back to our firebase console and dare click on database.
Here you'll find two database's.
Cloud, firestorm, and also the real time database and early and of course, we use the real time database
because that was the one that was easier to use as a dummy backend that gave us a nice rest API, which
we could use now.
We're going to use Cloud Forest to work, which is the more modern solution by FIREBASE, which does
not give us such a nice rest API, but which doesn't matter here because we're going to communicate
with it through to Flutter Firebase SDK anyways so you can click on create a database and make sure
you start in test mode here.
That's important so that we can access this database without limitations.
Click on next.
And choose any location you want here.
That's the end, the server that is going to be used.
You can leave the default here and click on Done.
Now, this will set up this database and this is a database which will run in the cloud.
And Firebase then has a layer between the database and between your app, which in the end is breached
by the Flutter Firebase SDK through which we can communicate to that database from within our Flutter
app.
Now, with the firestorm created here, with that database created here.
Let's go back to our chat screen, where we have our list view here and let's, for example, pull in
some data that resides in this database that we can create a collection here, which is basically a
table in your database.
You could say, and I'm going to name my collection here, Chat's click them next.
And you can now also add a document here.
A document is basically an entry in that table and you're going to fetch documents and you're going
to be able to write documents with help of the Flodden Firebase SDK.
So a collection will basically be where you later store your data.
And a document is one piece of data.
So not a document in the sense of a word document where you write a text, but a document instead is
just a piece of data.
For example, if you would be building an online shop, you could have a collection which is named Products.
And in there you have a list of products where every single product is a document in the products collection,
or you have a collection named users with a bunch of user documents in there and in FIREBASE.
Every document can also have some collections.
So you could have a chat's collection with a bunch of chatroom documents.
And every chatroom document could then have a message collection which contains individual messages,
documents.
That's how fire stored is structured.
But we'll see that in action from this module.
Now, I'm going to generate an ID automatically here.
And I'm not going to add any field here, I'll just save it like this instead.
And now here we got this chat's collection with this one chat document we created in India, we can
create a new collection and you always have days pattern in firebase collection, document collection
document.
So our collection always has documents and a document may have other collections.
It may also have other fields, like, for example, some text you want to store in there, some numbers,
whatever.
Here in my chat's collection, I have one document and in that chat document I'm going to create a new
collection which will name messages, click next and create an idea automatically.
And now I'm going to add a field here which will name text.
The type is string, which means it's well, some text and then the value here could just be hi there
like this.
And if I now save this, this is stored.
And now in the end I have a chat's collection with one document which has a message, this collection
which then has my messages where I have one document which has a text of hi there.
And we can now utilize this here in our chat screen widget.
Let's say besides our body.
We at a floating action button here, so our regular floating action button.
Where the child is simply.
And Ican.
Let's say the ad item for now.
And we're on prest, we want to execute some function.
Now, the function I want to execute here is a function that should reach out to Firebase and for the
moment not add anything will add to this later, but instead fetch the data from there so that we can
see how we can communicate with Firebase, eventually will output all the data here.
But for the moment, let's just output the data we fetch in the console with a print statement of four
that we need to fetch.
At first, though, and we can do this with Firestorm.
We installed this firestorm package to cloud forest or package.
So now in Shet screen where I want to use it, I can import package, cloud, firestorm, cloud, firestorm,
dot, dart.
And with this import added here in on prest, you can access Firestorm.
Dort instance, there always is one act of instance which is managed on your behalf, and on that instance
you can execute methods.
You can, for example, use collection to reach out to a collection.
Now, here, you then specify the name of the collection or you specify a full path to a specific sub
collection.
For example, here I want to get my chat's and there is one chat which I created.
It has this idea which was generated automatically.
Let's quickly grab this ID here and add it here and add another slash and then reach out to messages.
So with this, we're telling the story that we want to get access to the messages collection inside
of this document instead of the Chet's collection.
Now, with this access to a collection, we can do more things, we can, for example, add a new document
with this ADD method, we can get a specific document here with the document method.
So get the data for a specific document.
We can also query and search for documents that meet a certain condition, for example.
And we also have snapshots here, and snapshots is an amazing method which we can call on a collection,
snapshots returns a stream.
Now, since it is a stream, that means it's going to emit new values whenever data changes, so that's
that real time data aspect I mentioned earlier, it allows us to set up a listener through the Firebase
Flattr SDK to our FIREBASE database.
And whenever data changes in there, this listener will be notified automatically and we can re render
our widget or do whatever we want to do.
So here for the moment, I will just call listen to set up a listener and pass in a function that will
trigger for every piece of data we get.
And I'll just print that data here inside of that function I passed to listen.
Now this is just some dummy code will replace it later, but for the moment it's good like this.
Now let's safeness and let's restart this application.
Here is our app and now click the plus button, if you click it, you will see an error.
Now, this can happen if you add it all your firebase configuration and you didn't restart your app
fully in between, so I'll actually close this running application and do a full restart and therefore
rebuild.
This makes sure that all those configuration settings and files, which we added will be taken into
account.
So let's wait for this full restart to finish.
And you might now be getting a different error, you might also not be getting this, this really depends
a bit on the point of time you're viewing this and the cloud firestorm flutter package we're using.
At the moment, you might get such air or that points at Decs Archive merger exception.
Now, this is simply a bag with the package, which is easy to fix.
You can go to your Android folder and then they built Gradle file in the app folder.
And they are in default config at the end at multi decks and abled, true written like this, make sure
the D and the E here is a capital case, D and E.
Also then scroll down and go to dependencies and here at implementation and then signal quotes, com
dot android dot support, Colen multi decs.
Colon 1.0, drug free.
Now, if you do all of that, if you add these two things and you restart your application, it should
now rebuild successfully and should restart successfully.
So let's wait for that to finish.
And that looks better.
Here's the running application and now click the button once.
If you do so, you should now see instance of query snapshot or is something similar here in the console.
And that's coming from this print statement here.
Indeed, on data, you can access different kinds of data.
For example, you can access a documents key.
And if you do that and you save and you click the plus button again, you see incents of documents,
snapshot like this in an array and you can access the first document here because this is an array.
With the square bracket notation and zero, which is the index of the first element, and then there
add one extra pair of square brackets and X's text like this text, because that's the.
Ky, I chose here in Massachusetts to store, to text for a single message, if you chose a different
key here, you need to access a different key here.
So that's essentially just getting access to that one document we have right now in the messages collection
and then retrieving the text field and the values stored in that field from there.
And if you say that now and you click the plus again, you will see how high they are here.
So that shows us that it works and that we have access to this database.
Now, we can also access DataDot documents.
And call for each on that to execute a function on every document, and that function will get the document
as an input and we can then do something with the document in here.
For example, print the document text, as we did before, the differences that we now do this for every
document we have in Massachusetts.
Now, at the moment, this still gives us just hi there.
But now the nice thing is if we go back to Firebase and here in Massachusetts, we add a new document.
So not a new field here, but a new document in messages.
And we give us an idea automatically and we add a text field here as well, and we add this is another
entry and a safe distance.
You will see it was added here, but without me doing anything here, without me restarting or clicking
the plus again.
So without any of that, you also see this is a no entry here and a lock because this is a stream and
they offer such a life listener to our collection.
Now, this is, of course, not the final way of how we want to listen, but this is a nice start.